Forum:		Cleanup
Issue:		DEFSTRUCT-CONSTRUCTOR-SLOT-VARIABLES
References:	DEFSTRUCT; CLtL p. 309
                Issue DEFSTRUCT-CONSTRUCTOR-KEY-MIXTURE (passed)
Category:	CLARIFICATION, CHANGE
Edit History:   V1, 11 Oct 1989, Sandra Loosemore
		V2, 02 Nov 1989, Sandra Loosemore (update discussion)


Problem Description:

Must the symbols which name DEFSTRUCT slots be bound as lambda
variables by the default keyword constructor function?  Normally it
would not matter, but if any of these symbols have been proclaimed
SPECIAL it will affect the dynamic environment in which the slot init
forms are evaluated.

There are three proposals, BOUND, NOT-BOUND, and VISIBLY-BOUND.


Background:

CLtL requires each default slot init form to be evaluated "in the
lexical environment of the DEFSTRUCT form in which it appeared".  This
means that the obvious technique of supplying the init forms as the
defaults for the keyword arguments in the lambda list of the
constructor function is incorrect, unless care is taken to avoid
shadowing any variable bindings of the symbols which correspond to
those arguments.

For example, given
    (defstruct foo
        (a <a-init>)
        (b <b-init>)
        (c <c-init>))

Generating the constructor as
    (defun make-foo (&key (a <a-init>) (b <b-init>) (c <c-init>)) ...)
may not evaluate <b-init> and <c-init> in the correct lexical environment
as specified in CLtL.  Proposal VISIBLY-BOUND would change the specification
to make this the correct behavior.

One alternative is to wrap the init forms in closures named with gensyms:
    (flet ((#:g1 () <a-init>)
           (#:g2 () <b-init>)
           (#:g3 () <c-init>))
        (defun make-foo (&key (a (#:g1)) (b (#:g2)) (c (#:g3))) ...))
Under proposal BOUND, this would be the correct way to implement the
constructor function.

Another alternative is to make the lambda variables themselves gensyms:
    (defun make-foo (&key ((:a #:g4) <a-init>)
                          ((:b #:g5) <b-init>)
                          ((:c #:g6) <c-init>)) ...)
Under proposal NOT-BOUND, this would be the correct way to implement the
constructor function.

(Of course, it's possible that DEFSTRUCT could produce a simplified
expansion in many cases by examining the init forms and/or lexical
environment.)

Issue DEFSTRUCT-CONSTRUCTOR-KEY-MIXTURE implies that BOA constructors
do bind the symbols which name slots as lambda variables, since these
variables can be referenced in the init forms for subsequent
arguments.


Proposal (DEFSTRUCT-CONSTRUCTOR-SLOT-VARIABLES:BOUND):

Clarify that the symbols which name slots must be bound as lambda
variables by the keyword constructor function, in the order in which
the slots are specified in the DEFSTRUCT form.  Variables for
inherited slots are bound before variables for explitly specified
slots, in the order in which they were specified in the definition of
the inherited structure.  Special bindings of these variables will be
visible during the evaluation of the default init forms for subsequent
slots.  The slot default init forms are still evaluated in the 
lexical environment in which the DEFSTRUCT form itself appears.

  Rationale:

  This appears to be closest to the intent of CLtL.


Proposal (DEFSTRUCT-CONSTRUCTOR-SLOT-VARIABLES:NOT-BOUND):

Clarify that the symbols which name slots must *not* be bound as
lambda variables by the keyword constructor function.  The slot
default init forms are evaluated in the lexical environment
in which the DEFSTRUCT form itself appears and the dynamic environment
in which the call to the constructor function appears.

  Rationale:

  This avoids the overhead of creating and invoking closures to compute
  the default values of the slots for the default keyword constructor.


Proposal (DEFSTRUCT-CONSTRUCTOR-SLOT-VARIABLES:VISIBLY-BOUND):

Clarify that the symbols which name slots must be bound as lambda
variables by the keyword constructor function, in the order in which
the slots are specified in the DEFSTRUCT form.  Variables for
inherited slots are bound before variables for explitly specified
slots, in the order in which they were specified in the definition of
the inherited structure.  Special bindings of these variables will be
visible during the evaluation of the default init forms for subsequent
slots.  

Remove the requirement that the slot default init forms be evaluated
in the lexical environment in which the DEFSTRUCT form itself appears.
Instead, require that they be evaluated in a lexical environment that
contains bindings for the previous lambda variables of the constructor
function.  This applies to both the default keyword constructor function
and BOA constructors.

  Rationale:

  This alternative corresponds most closely to current practice.  It
  avoids the overhead of creating and invoking closures to compute the
  default values of the slots for both the default keyword constructor
  and BOA constructors.


Example/Test Cases:

(defvar x 'global-x)
(let ((y  'local-y))
    (defstruct baz (x 'x-init) (y x) (z y)))
(make-baz)

Under proposal BOUND,
    slot X is initialized to X-INIT
    slot Y is initialized to X-INIT
        (since the init form X is evaluated in the dynamic environment
        containing the binding to X-INIT)
    slot Z is initialized to LOCAL-Y
        (since the init form Y is evaluated in the lexical environment in
        which the DEFSTRUCT appears)

Under proposal NOT-BOUND,
    slot X is initialized to X-INIT
    slot Y is initialized to GLOBAL-X
        (since the constructor does not rebind the special variable X)
    slot Z is initialized to LOCAL-Y

Under proposal VISIBLY-BOUND,
    slot X is initialized to X-INIT
    slot Y is initialized to X-INIT
        (since the special binding of X made by the constructor is visible)
    slot Z is initialized to X-INIT
        (since the lexical binding of Y made by the constructor is visible)
       

Current Practice:

Most implementations (including Lucid CL, HPCL-I, KCL, CMU Common Lisp)
appear to implement proposal VISIBLY-BOUND even though it is in conflict
with what is required by CLtL.

Utah Common Lisp currently implements proposal NOT-BOUND.


Cost to implementors:

For proposal BOUND, the cost of implementing the proposal correctly is
fairly small.  The cost of implementing it both correctly and efficiently
is potentially much larger.

For proposal NOT-BOUND, the implementation cost is again fairly small, 
but it still requires essentially the same work as in proposal BOUND to
handle BOA constructors correctly.

Proposal VISIBLY-BOUND has the least implementation cost, since this
is what most implementations already do and is the least complicated
of the alternatives.


Cost to users:

Adopting any of these proposals would improve the situation faced by
users now.

Users may find proposal VISIBLY-BOUND to be marginally more useful
than the other alternatives since it allows the values of slots to be
referenced in the subsequent default init forms.


Benefits:

An area of confusion in the language is removed.


Discussion:

Loosemore doesn't care much about which of these alternatives we
adopt, but thinks that leaving this unspecified would be a mistake.

Margolin says:
  By the way, I prefer this proposal [NOT-BOUND].  I think lexical
  environments should be captured (I think we've fixed everything so
  that init-forms are always evaluated in the appropriate lexical
  environment), but I don't like making the order of slots significant
  by allowing init forms to reference other slots.  Order of slots is
  often constrained by other requirements (such as the :INCLUDE
  hierarchy, or using :TYPE to match a pre-existing structure), so they
  shouldn't have an effect on the semantics of the structure.

Moon says:
  Surely the default constructor function and "BOA constructors" must work
  compatibly.  Unspecified initforms for optional and keyword arguments in
  a "BOA constructor" default from the slot initform rather than NIL, so
  "BOA constructors" face the same issue as default constructors.

  VISIBLY-BOUND seems semantically wrong.

  I would go with BOUND, assuming we can't just get rid of DEFSTRUCT
  entirely.  I don't care about the supposed efficiency issue, which is
  easily gotten around or ignored.

-------

