Status:	       Version 8 passed (superseding version 6), 6/8/90

Forum:         Cleanup
Issue:         LISP-SYMBOL-REDEFINITION
 
References:    Cleanup issue PACKAGE-CLUTTER
               CLtL pp 67-69 Defining named functions
	       CLtL pp 101-106 Generalized variables
	       Cleanup issue FUNCTION-NAME
	       Condition System, version 18
	       CLOS specification, 88-002R
 
Category:      CLARIFICATION
 
Edit history:  Masinter, Version 1, 17-Sep-88 from (Kolb, 14-Aug-87)
               Masinter, Version 2, 7-Oct-88
               Masinter, Version 3,  7-Oct-88, fix typos
               van Roggen, Version 4, 13-Oct-88, undefined, not unspecified
               Masinter, Version 5, 22-Nov-88, add more cases
	       Masinter, Version 6,  9-Apr-89, make Mar 89 X3j13 amendments
	       Barrett, Version 7, 3-Jan-90, add more cases
	       Barrett, Version 8, 9-Jan-90, make Jun 90 X3J13 ammendments
 
Problem description:
 
Is it legal to redefine Common Lisp functions? There is no explicit
prohibition, and many implementations do allow redefinition of
functions in the Lisp package.
 
CLtL only says that special forms can not be redefined. But this doesn't 
solve the general problem of redefining system functions.
 
Proposal LISP-SYMBOL-REDEFINITION:MAR89-X3J13

Except where explicitly allowed, the consequences are undefined if any of the
following actions are performed on symbols exported from the COMMON-LISP
package:

1. Binding or altering its value (lexically or dynamically)
2. Defining, undefining, or binding it as a function
3. Defining, undefining, or binding it as a macro or compiler-macro
4. Defining it as a type specifier (defstruct, defclass, define-condition,
   deftype)
5. Defining it as a structure (defstruct)
6. Defining it as a declaration (declaration, define-declaration)
7. Using it as a symbol macro
8. Altering its print name (this may already be prohibited)
9. Altering its package
10. Tracing it
11. Declaring or proclaiming it special
12. Declaring or proclaiming its type or ftype
13. Uninterning or unexporting it from the package COMMON-LISP
14. Defining a setf method for it (defsetf, define-setf-method, defining,
    undefining, or binding the function named (SETF symbol))
15. Defining it as a method combination type
16. Using it as the class-name argument to SETF of FIND-CLASS

If such a symbol is not globally defined as a variable or a constant, it is
allowed to lexically bind it as a variable or as a symbol-macro and declare the
type of that binding.

If such a symbol is not defined as a function, macro, or special form,
it is allowed to (lexically) bind it as a function and to declare the
ftype of that binding and to trace that binding.

If such a symbol is not defined as a function, macro, or special form,
it is allowed to (lexically) bind it as a macro.

If such a symbol does not have a setf method defined for it, it is allowed to
(lexically) bind the function named (SETF symbol).

Examples:
 
The behavior of the construct:
 
(FLET ((OPEN (filename &key direction) (format t "Open called....") 
			(OPEN filename :direction direction)))
    (with-open-file (x "frob" :direction ':output) 
		(format t "was Open called?")))
 
is undefined; for example, the macro expansion of with-open-file might refer
to the OPEN function and might not.
 
(DEFUN CAR (X) (CDR X))
 
might signal an error.
 
Rationale:
 
This proposal is the only simple resolution of the problem description that
we can imagine that is consistent with current implementation techniques.
 
Allowing arbitrary redefinition of symbols in the system would place
severe restrictions on implementations not to actually use those symbols in
macro expansions of other symbols, in function calls, etc. While some
looser restrictions might do for any particular Common Lisp implementation,
there seems to be no good way to distinguish between those symbols that are
redefinable and those that are not.
 
In general, programs can redefine functions safely by creating new symbols in
their own package, possibly shadowing the name.
 
Current practice:
 
Many Lisp environments have some mechanism for warning about redefinition of
Lisp symbols and preventing accidental redefinition while allowing it where
necessary (e.g., to patch the Lisp system itself, fix a bug, add an
optimization.)
 
Fewer check for lexical redefinition, since such redefinition is not as
dangerous. Certainly, there are some symbols that are never used in macro
expansions of the standard Common Lisp macros. However, implementations do
differ on the behavior of macro expansions.
 
Cost to Implementors:
 
This proposal clarifies the status quo -- that the consequences are undefined.
It allows and encourages implementors to check for such redefinition, but does
not require it.
 
Cost to Users:
 
This proposal clarifies that implementations are free to check for a condition
that they might not have before, and may clarify that some current user code is
non-portable.
 
Benefits:
 
This issue frequently arises. Adopting this proposal would clarify a frequent
source of question about Common Lisp. 
 
Cost of non-adoption:
 
Continued questions.
 
Esthetics:
 
Disallowing all redefinition is the simplest way of disallowing the ones that
really are trouble. 
 
Discussion:
 
At the March 89 X3j13 meeting, a proposed additional constraint 
("Altering its property list") was removed. Presumably this means
that conformal programs are allowed to alter the property list of
 symbols in the COMMON-LISP package.

