Issue:          CHAR-SCHAR-TYPE-ERROR
Forum:          Cleanup
Category:       CLARIFICATION
Status:         draft
Edit History:   16-Jul-21, Version 1 by Robert Strandh,
                17-Jul-21, Version 2 by Robert Strandh.
References:     CHAR, SCHAR

Problem Description:

  In the draft ANSI Common Lisp specification, the description of the
  functions CHAR and SCHAR indicates no exceptional situations.  The
  section "Arguments and Values" mentions that the string argument
  must be a string, which by default means that the consequences are
  undefined if an object that is not of type string is given.

Proposal (CHAR-SCHAR-TYPE-ERROR:SIGNAL-ERROR-IN-SAFE-CODE):

  This proposal changes the description of the CHAR and SCHAR
  functions, so that the section "Exceptional Situations" instead
  reads:

  "The functions CHAR and SCHAR should signal an error of type
  TYPE-ERROR if given an argument which is not a string."

Test Cases:

  (defun one (object)
    (declare (optimize (safety 3)))
    (char object 0))

  (defun two (object)
    (declare (optimize (safety 3)))
    (schar object 0))

  (one 234) => ERROR: The value 234 is not of type STRING.
  (two 234) => ERROR: The value 234 is not of type STRING.

Rationale:

  We think it was a simple omission from the draft ANSI specification
  to indicate no exceptional situations.

Current Practice:

  SBCL 2.1.3
    (one 234) => [signals a type error]
    (two 234) => [signals a type error]

  TODO: check other implementations.

Cost to Implementors:

  Very small.  We believe that most implementations are already
  signaling an error in safe code.  Some implementations may signal a
  simple error, and those implementation would need to signal a
  type-error instead.

Cost to Users:

  None.

Cost of non-adoption:

  Application programmers may need to add explicit checks to be
  certain that their code is conforming.

Benefits:

  Application programmers may rely on an error being
  signaled in safe code, and thus avoid having to
  add explicit checks in portable code.

Aesthetics:

  No influence.

Discussion:

  TODO
