Issue:          DIGIT-CHAR-P-TYPE-ERROR
Forum:          Cleanup
Category:       CLARIFICATION
Status:         draft
Edit History:   14-Jul-21, Version 1 by Robert Strandh.
References:     DIGIT-CHAR-P

Problem Description:

  In the draft ANSI Common Lisp specification, the description of the
  function DIGIT-CHAR-P indicates no exceptional situations.  The
  section "Arguments and Values" mentions that the character argument
  must be a character, which by default means that the consequences
  are undefined if an object that is not of type character is given.

Proposal (DIGIT-CHAR-P-TYPE-ERROR:SIGNAL-ERROR-IN-SAFE-CODE):

  This proposal changes the description of the DIGIT-CHAR-P function,
  so that the section "Exceptional Situations" instead reads:

  "The function DIGIT-CHAR-P should signal an error of type TYPE-ERROR
  if given an argument which is not a character.

Test Cases:

  (defun one (object)
    (declare (optimize (safety 3)))
    (digit-char-p object))

  (one 234) => ERROR: The value 234 is not of type CHARACTER.

Rationale:

  We think it was a simple omission from the draft ANSI specification
  to indicate no exceptional situations.  The fact that the function
  ALPHANUMERICP explictly mentions the same exceptional situation
  as proposed here seems to support this idea.

Current Practice:

  SBCL 2.1.3
    (one) => [signals a type error]

  TODO: check other implementations.

Cost to Implementors:

  Very small.  We believe that most implementations are already
  signaling an error in safe code.  Some implementations may signal a
  simple error, and those implementation would need to signal a
  type-error instead.

Cost to Users:

  None.

Cost of non-adoption:

  Application programmers may need to add explicit checks to be
  certain that their code is conforming.

Benefits:

  Application programmers may rely on an error being
  signaled in safe code, and thus avoid having to
  add explicit checks in portable code.

Aesthetics:

  No influence.

Discussion:

  TODO
