Issue:          FIND-SYMBOL-TYPE-ERROR
Forum:          Cleanup
Category:       CLARIFICATION
Status:         draft
Edit History:   31-Jul-21, Version 1 by Robert Strandh.
References:     FIND-SYMBOL

Problem Description:

  In the draft ANSI Common Lisp specification, the description of the
  function FIND-SYMBOL indicates no exceptional situations.  The
  section "Arguments and Values" mentions that the required parameter
  STRING must be a string, and that the optional parameter PACKAGE
  must be a package designator, which by default means that the
  consequences are undefined if an object that is not a string is
  given as the STRING argument, or if an object that is not a package
  designator is given as the PACKAGE argument.

Proposal (FIND-SYMBOL-TYPE-ERROR:SIGNAL-ERROR-IN-SAFE-CODE):

  This proposal changes the description of the FIND-SYMBOL function,
  so that the section "Exceptional Situations" instead reads:

  "The function FIND-SYMBOL should signal an error of type TYPE-ERROR
  if the STRING argument is not a string, or if the PACKAGE argument
  is not a package designator."

Test Cases:

  (defun one (object1 object2)
    (declare (optimize (safety 3)))
    (find-symbol object1 object2))

  (one 234 *package*) => ERROR: The value 234 is not of type ...
  (one "hello" 234) => ERROR: The value 234 is not of type ...

Rationale:

  We think it was a simple omission from the draft ANSI specification
  to indicate no exceptional situations.

Current Practice:

  SBCL 2.1.3
    (one 234 *package*) => [signals a type error]
    (one "hello" 234) => [signals a type error]

  TODO: check other implementations.

Cost to Implementors:

  Very small.  We believe that most implementations are already
  signaling an error in safe code.  Some implementations may signal a
  simple error, and those implementation would need to signal a
  type-error instead.

Cost to Users:

  None.

Cost of non-adoption:

  Application programmers may need to add explicit checks to be
  certain that their code is conforming.

Benefits:

  Application programmers may rely on an error being
  signaled in safe code, and thus avoid having to
  add explicit checks in portable code.

Aesthetics:

  No influence.

Discussion:

  TODO
