Issue:          SUBTYPEP-UNKNOWN-TYPES
Forum:          Cleanup
Category:       CHANGE
Status:         draft
Edit History:   14-Jul-21, Version 1 by Bike.
References:     SUBTYPEP
Related issues: SUBTYPEP-TOO-VAGUE

Problem Description:

  The draft ANSI Common Lisp specification says in part, concerning SUBTYPEP:
    "subtypep is permitted to return the values false and false only when at
     least one argument involves one of these type specifiers: and, eql, the
     list form of function, member, not, or, satisfies, or values."
  and
    "subtypep never returns a second value of nil when both type-1 and type-2
     involve only the [...] names of types defined by [...] defclass"

  This causes difficulties with forward-referenced classes, for which only
  incomplete subtype information is available, as well as "unknown" types (i.e.,
  types with no definition known to the implementation, as can for example
  appear during COMPILE-FILE processing). In this case it could be useful to
  allow SUBTYPEP to return an inexact answer. This would also strengthen the
  requirement for SUBTYPEP to return exact results when the implementation does
  have complete subtype information.

  It is worth noting that the standard contemplates "unknown" type specifiers
  in the section concerning DEFTYPE:
    "If the expansion of a type specifier is not defined fully at compile time
     (perhaps because it expands into an unknown type specifier [...]), an
     implementation may ignore any references to this type in declarations
     and/or signal a warning."

  This issue essentially concerns what SUBTYPEP can do in this situation.

Proposal (SUBTYPEP-UNKNOWN-TYPES:LOOSEN-SIMPLE):

  Amend the definition of SUBTYPEP such that

  * It may return a second value of false when either type specifier involves
    a symbol that is unknown to the type system, i.e. is not a standard atomic
    type specifier listed in Figure 4-2 and has not been defined by DEFSTRUCT,
    DEFINE-CONDITION, DEFCLASS, or DEFTYPE.
  * It may return a second value of false when either type specifier involves a
    class that has not been finalized, or the name of such a class.

  Rationale:

    Simple to define and implement and gives the required flexibility.

Proposal (SUBTYPEP-UNKNOWN-TYPES:LOOSEN-COMPLEX):

  Amend the definition of SUBTYPEP such that

  * [ditto the first entry above]
  * It may return a second value of false when either type specifier involves a
    class that has not been finalized, or the name of such a class, unless there
    is a chain of direct superclass relationships from the unfinalized class to
    the relevant type involved in the other argument.

  This second condition is harder to define specifically. A more exacting
  definition might go as follows. If A, B, and C are classes or names thereof,

  * A is a recognizable subtype of itself.
  * If A is a direct subclass of B, A is a recognizable subtype of B. (This
    includes cases where A is unfinalized and/or B is forward-referenced.)
  * If A is a recognizable subtype of B, and B is a recognizable subtype of C,
    A is a recognizable subtype of C. (This includes cases where, for example,
    C is forward-referenced, B is defined but not finalized, and A is a subclass
    of B.)
  * If A is finalized and B appears in its class precedence list, A is a
    recognizable subtype of B. If A is finalized and B does not appear in its
    class precedence list, A is recognizably not a subtype of B.
    The positive condition here is actually unnecessary as it's covered by
    the direct subclass and transitivity definitions above, but it's probably
    worth noting.
  * If A is not finalized, A is recognizably not a subtype of any of the types
    listed as disjoint from types defined by DEFCLASS by CLHS 4.2.2, and in
    turn, those types are recognizably not subtypes of A.

  Rationale:

    Provides the needed flexibility, while forcing SUBTYPEP to recognize some
    obvious cases, as can be useful.

Proposal (SUBTYPEP-UNKNOWN-TYPES:ERROR):

  Amend the definition of SUBTYPEP so that an error is signaled if one or both
  type specifiers provided is undefined or only partially defined.

  Rationale:

    This is a stricter version of the existing definition. It makes the
    situation clearer without abandoning the existing definition.

Examples:

  ;;; Here we define our own version of a standard function, with a compiler
  ;;; macro to signal a warning if it's given a bad type specifier.
  (defun my-make-sequence (result-type length &rest keys)
    (apply #'make-sequence result-type length keys))
  (define-compiler-macro my-make-sequence (result-type length &rest keys
                                           &environment env)
    (declare (ignore length keys))
    (multiple-value-bind (st surety) (subtypep result-type 'sequence env)
      (when (and (not st) surety) ; definitely not a subtype
        (warn "~a given a bad type specifier ~a!"
              'my-make-sequence result-type))))
  ;;; Now say we compile
  (my-make-sequence 'unknown 5)
  ;;; where UNKNOWN has not been defined by DEFTYPE etc.
  ;;; If compiler macroexpanded, SUBTYPEP cannot return true or false (because
  ;;; the type system doesn't know whether or not it is a subtype), and can
  ;;; also not return NIL NIL, as neither type specifier includes one of the
  ;;; symbols listed in the description of SUBTYPEP. A conforming implementation
  ;;; must do something else, like signal an error or crash.
  ;;; Under either loosening proposal, the subtypep would return NIL NIL, so no
  ;;; warning would be issued by the compiler macro function, which is the
  ;;; appropriate behavior, since it's not clear whether or not the call will be
  ;;; an error at runtime.
  ;;; Under ERROR, the compiler macro function would definitely signal an error.
  
Current Practice:

  Test 1 is (subtypep 'unknown 'sequence).
  Test 2 is (defclass foo (bar) ()) (subtypep 'foo 'bar).
  Test 3 is (defclass foo2 (foo) ()) (subtypep 'foo2 'foo) subsequent to above.
  Test 4 is (subtypep 'foo 'hash-table).
  Test 5 is (subtypep 'bar 'hash-table).

         Test 1         Test 2       Test 3     Test 4          Test 5
  SBCL   NIL NIL        T T          T T        NIL T           NIL T
  CCL    NIL NIL        T T          NIL NIL    NIL NIL         NIL NIL
  Clasp  NIL NIL        NIL NIL      NIL NIL    NIL NIL         NIL NIL

  SBCL conforms to LOOSEN-COMPLEX. CCL and Clasp conform to LOOSEN-SIMPLE.
  None tested conform to the current standard.

Cost to Implementors:

  Both loosening proposals loosen existing requirements, so they would take no
  effort to implement.
  Some implementations (e.g. CCL and Clasp) would need to reorganize their
  code a bit to implement LOOSEN-COMPLEX.
  ERROR would require several implementations to change how SUBTYPEP works, and
  could take some extensive effort. SBCL for example has an internal dedicated
  UNKNOWN-TYPE structure which is used within the compiler.

Cost to Users:

  For the loosening proposals, users relying on SUBTYPEP to signal an error in
  these cases would be disappointed, but SUBTYPEP is not already required to
  signal an error anyway.
  ERROR would invalidate existing code that treats SUBTYPEP as being tolerant
  of undefined types, as in the example code.

Benefits:

  Any proposal gives understandable behavior. LOOSEN-COMPLEX additionally
  allows SUBTYPEP to be used to answer questions about forward referenced
  classes.

Cost of non-adoption:

  Behavior of SUBTYPEP in these cases remains vague and hard to use.
  Implementations continue to not conform to the standard as written.

Discussion:

  The existing definition of SUBTYPEP does not seem to be written with the
  possibility of undefined or partially undefined subtype relationships in
  mind (as distinct from uncomputable relationships). Practice has shown that
  SUBTYPEP is often used by compilers and other code analysis tools, and for
  this it is often convenient to use NIL NIL to represent these partially-known
  relationships as well.

  It could be argued that SUBTYPEP should return a definite false if given an
  unfinalized class and a class that is not a direct superclass (or a direct
  superclass of a direct superclass, etc.) because in that moment, it is not a
  definite subtype. Alternately, it could be argued that types are defined as
  sets of objects, and the set of objects that are instances of an unfinalized
  class is necessarily empty (because unfinalized classes cannot be
  instantiated), so an unfinalized class is the bottom type and thus a subtype
  of any type. Neither of these behaviors seem practically useful to me at all,
  but they could be written up as proposals if someone disagrees.
