Issue:          UNINTERN-TYPE-ERROR
Forum:          Cleanup
Category:       CLARIFICATION
Status:         draft
Edit History:   29-Jul-21, Version 1 by Robert Strandh.
References:     UNINTERN

Problem Description:

  In the draft ANSI Common Lisp specification, the description of the
  function UNINTERN indicates a single exceptional situation, which is
  when the fact that the symbol is uninterned, a name conflict can
  occor.  However, no exceptional situation is mentioned related to
  the types of the arguments.  As a result, the consequences are
  undefined if the required argument is not a symbol, or if the
  optional argument is not a package designator.

Proposal (UNINTERN-TYPE-ERROR:SIGNAL-ERROR-IN-SAFE-CODE):

  This proposal changes the description of the UNINTERN function, so
  that the section "Exceptional Situations" contains these additional
  phrases:

  "The function UNINTERN should signal an error of type TYPE-ERROR if
  the PACKAGE argument is not a package designator.", and "The
  function UNINTERN should signal an error of type TYPE-ERROR if the
  SYMBOL argument is not a symbol.

Test Cases:

  (defun one (object1 object2)
    (declare (optimize (safety 3)))
    (unintern object1 object2))

  (one 234 "CL-USER") => ERROR: The value 234 is not of type ...
  (one 'a 234) => ERROR: The value 234 is not of type ...

Rationale:

  We think it was a simple omission from the draft ANSI specification
  to indicate no exceptional situations for these cases.

Current Practice:

  SBCL 2.1.3
    (one 234 "CL-USER") => [signals a type error]
    (one 'a 234) => [signals a type error]

  TODO: check other implementations.

Cost to Implementors:

  Very small.  We believe that most implementations are already
  signaling an error in safe code.  Some implementations may signal a
  simple error, and those implementation would need to signal a
  TYPE-ERROR instead.

Cost to Users:

  None.

Cost of non-adoption:

  Application programmers may need to add explicit checks to be
  certain that their code is conforming.

Benefits:

  Application programmers may rely on an error being
  signaled in safe code, and thus avoid having to
  add explicit checks in portable code.

Aesthetics:

  No influence.

Discussion:

  TODO
