Issue:          FFLOOR-ETC-QUOTIENT-TYPE
Forum:          Cleanup
Category:       CLARIFICATION
Status:         proposed
Edit History:   22-August-1, Version 1 by Bike
References:     FFLOOR, FCEILING, FTRUNCATE, FROUND
Related Issues: FLOOR-ETC-REMAINDER-TYPE

Problem Description:

  In the draft ANSI Common Lisp specification, the description of
  the type of the quotient returned by the FFLOOR family of functions
  is self-contradictory. In the Arguments and Values section, it says

    "quotient---[...] for ffloor, fceiling, ftruncate, and fround:
     a float."

  But in the Description, it says

    "ffloor, fceiling, ftruncate, and fround handle arguments of
     different types in the following way: if number is a float, and
     divisor is not a float of longer format, then the first result
     is a float of the same type as number. Otherwise, the first
     result is of the type determined by contagion rules; see
     Section 12.1.1.2 (Contagion in Numeric Operations)."

  This contradicts the Arguments and Values section because the usual
  contagion rules would make the quotient a rational if both parameters
  were rational, contrary to the idea that the quotient is always
  a float. This also makes it unclear what format of float these
  functions should return if given rationals.

Proposal (FFLOOR-ETC-QUOTIENT-TYPE:FLOAT-CONTAGION):

  Specify in the description that, if either argument is a float, the
  quotient is a float of the largest format of an argument as per
  12.1.4.4. Additionally specify that if both arguments are rationals,
  the result is a single float, which is in analogy to the rule for
  irrational functions of rationals in 12.1.3.3. For example:

    "For FFLOOR, CEILING, TRUNCATE, and ROUND, the type of the
     quotient is determined in the following way: If either argument
     is a float, the quotient is a float of the largest format among
     the floating point arguments to the function, as per Section
     12.1.4.1 (Rule of Float and Rational Contagion) and Section
     12.1.4.4 (Rule of Float Precision Contagion). Otherwise, if both
     arguments are rational, the quotient is a single float."

Rationale:

  This has minimal friction with the rest of the arithmetic operations,
  and goes with what seems to be the point of the FFLOOR family, which
  is to always return a float quotient just as the FLOOR family always
  returns an integer quotient.

Test Cases:

  (values (ftruncate 3 2)) ; => 1f0
  (values (ftruncate 3f0 2)) ; => 1f0
  (values (ftruncate 3 2d0)) ; => 1d0
  (values (ftruncate 3d0 2f0)) ; => 1d0
  (values (ftruncate 3f0 2d0)) ; => 1d0

Current Practice:

  SBCL 2.0.0 and Clasp 0.4.2-5623-g89a262d0f match the test case
  results, except that Clasp returns 1f0 for the last case in the
  interpreter. This is contrary to the existing description and so
  a bug even without the proposal.

Cost to Implementors:

  None, if they already have this behavior. Slight if they don't.

Cost to Users:

  None.

Benefits:

  Clarity.
