Issue:          STANDARDIZED-RESTART-NAMES
Forum:          Cleanup
Category:       CLARIFICATION, CHANGE
Status:         proposed
Edit history:   2004-06-16, Version 1 by Christophe Rhodes
                2021-07-15, version 2 by Bike (reformat for WSCL, etc)
References:     RESTART-BIND, RESTART-CASE, WITH-SIMPLE-RESTART

Problem Description:

  In the restrictions on conforming programs, section 11.1.2.1.2, point 18, it
  is specified that except where specifically allowed, the consequences are
  undefined if any symbols in the Common Lisp package are bound as a restart
  name. However, no such permission is given anywhere, even for the standardized
  restart names; strictly, this means that the user is unable to participate in
  the protocols defined by those restarts portably, by binding those names where
  it makes semantic sense.

Proposal (STANDARDIZED-RESTART-NAMES:ALLOW-BINDING):

  Explicitly allow binding the standardized restart names (abort, continue,
  muffle-warning, store-value and use-value) as restarts names by conforming
  code.

Test case:

  ;;; Strictly speaking, this code has undefined behavior.
  (defun read-eval-print-loop (level)
    (with-simple-restart (abort "Exit command level ~D." level)
      (loop
        (with-simple-restart (abort "Return to command level ~D." level)
          (let ((form (prog2 (fresh-line) (read) (fresh-line))))
            (prin1 (eval form)))))))

Rationale:

  read-eval-print-loop, above, is an example from the ANSI standard; it was
  clearly intended that this should work.

Current practice:

  The author knows of no implementation which is incompatible with proposal
  STANDARDIZED-RESTART-NAMES:ALLOW-BINDING.

Cost to Implementors:

  Minimal, or none if they already allow this.

Cost to Users:

  None.

Cost of Non-Adoption:

  Continued inability to participate in the protocols defined by the ANSI
  standard.

Benefits:

  Enhanced portability of code, and enhanced ability of disparate programs to
  cooperate in protocols.
